# Go-Code-Colorado-2022-Team-Health-Oasis
Contest sponsored and organized by the Colorado Secretary of State Jena Griswold

Summary statement
Title: The Colorado Health Oasis Application
Description: CHO is a novel application that addresses the global problem of “healthcare deserts” or disparities in healthcare geographically.  CHO aims to improve access to specialized healthcare for the consumer, to increase opportunities for service providers and to match healthcare systems with the providers they seek, leading to health oases in Colorado.  
Introduction: What is a healthcare desert and why should we care about finding solutions to these deserts in our state?  A healthcare desert, simply put, refers to communities that lack healthcare resources nearby.  Historically “nearby” has referred to resources within a 30-minute drive.  But that distance has focused on necessary, life-saving medical care such as trauma centers and emergency rooms where the difference between a 15-minute drive and 30-minute drive can mean the difference between life and death.  While access to an emergency room is clearly important to the residents of a state, there are other services that are critical to one’s quality of life.  For example, allied health professionals (e.g. occupational therapy, physical therapy) provide many of the services that come after a visit to the emergency room. These services are utilized by far more individuals than just those experiencing a life or death emergency room visits and they are often life-changing and associated with one’s quality of life. 
Problem Statement: Let’s take a specific example that affects thousands of Coloradoans every year.  Stroke, a brain injury caused by a disruption of of blood supply, is the number one cause of serious adult disability in the United States. In Colorado, it is the 5th leading cause of death and, depending on the severity and subsequent care of an individual experiencing a stroke, one of the leading costs of disability.  Stroke has three magic numbers associated with recovery and costs to the individual and society, 90 minutes, 60 minutes and 90 days, all affected by proximity to care. Ninety minutes refers to the goal for the maximum amount of time that should elapse between the first sign of a stroke and the initiation of treatment for a stroke, 60 minutes is the “door to needle” treatment goal once the patient enters the hospital and 90 days is “golden period” post-stroke treatment when rehabilitation will likely determine one’s quality of life for the remainder of their life.  It is this 90-day period when a different type of health desert kicks in and families may not have access to a host of allied health professionals (e.g. occupational therapists, physical therapists, speech therapists) that will be key in their loved one’s recovery.  
But strokes are just one example of a health condition, for which one’s outcome is guided by accessibility to the healthcare needed.  For some individuals, it is access to an addictions counselor, for others a chiropractor and, as we age, there may be other services that become critical to quality of life, such as access to an audiologist and hearing aide provider.  If we were asked whether or not access to these services play a role in our quality of life, we would probably all respond with a resounding, “of course”.  But this is often a factor that is overlooked when deciding where to live and when juggling priorities for our next home or next move.  Current metrics that exist in the state and in real estate selection, specifically, focus on factors such as nearby schools and walkability, but this often leaves out one of the most important factors, access to specialized healthcare.  
Application Solutions: Colorado Health Oasis fills this need in a unique way that benefits those moving to Colorado or within Colorado AND healthcare providers.  On a consumer level, if someone is looking for regions in our state that provide services customized for themselves or their families, the CHO app allows them to see hotspots for areas with the desired service and to look at specific cities they are considering to see if the type of service they are seeking is available. Using the Professional and Occupational License Types in Colorado from the Department of Regulatory Agencies (DORA) in Colorado Information Marketplace, we are able to gather information regarding a host of currently licensted healthcare professionals spanning close to 100 types of care. The consumer can search by service or by region and can include multiple service types in their search.
On a servicer provider level, the use of the DORA database is optimal in that the database provides up to date information on each licensed individual, allowing for contact and customization that could further strengthen the app.  For example, each individual service provider could have the ability to customize their profile in CHO and let the consumer know; types of service specialities, distance of service provided, types of insurance the provider takes and to let potential employers know if they are looking for employment.  In addition, if a service provider is looking for regions in which their services are needed rather than regions that are saturated, the app provides that information.
Last, on a healthcare system level, the app allows healthcare systems to find where the type of providers they need currently reside to determine where they can establish healthcare services and have access to the healthcare providers needed.  Given that allied healthcare providers are in demand, CHO allows those providers to see where their work is most needed and, potentially, allows healthcare systems to explore locations in the state that have currently been underserved to provide these much needed services.
Summary: For the state of Colorado, CHO allows us to be on the forefront of getting rid of healthcare deserts and focus on being known for providing customized healthcare oases for our residents.  CHO is also a business tool in that it provides the data employers need to find gaps in services in the state, where each type of service provider resides and make informed decisions that help shape optimal healthcare in the state.  In addition, because the DORA data is constantly updated, it is sustainable to a degree that most data sets lack.  Unlike “snapshot” data sets that provide useful information during a specific year, but may not be updated, CHO is constantly updated. While the CHO app already provides a novel service regarding health services in the state, utilizing the DORA database makes the potential customization almost limitless.

Dataset Used: https://data.colorado.gov/Regulations/Professional-and-Occupational-Licenses-in-Colorado/7s5z-vewr
